---
title: "A little Odysseus: How I solve my latency problem in NeoVIM "
description: "Fixing ltex-ls setup on NeoVIM"
date: 2025-09-25
lang: en-GB
---

## A bit of context

I used to say that I should write more blog posts. It was about a year ago. You
hold in your hands the first blog post of 2025. Nice, yeah! üéâ

Now we have done the presentation, let's dig into the problem. Now that we've
done the introduction, let's delve into the problem. For a while, when I was
editing some large files on
[NeoVIM](../../wiki/C-Computer-science/CB-Tools/neovim.md), it would lag and
insert the same character multiple time. It was quite painful, but it didn't
occur frequently enough to become "a Problem" (with a capital P). I would
simply remove the extra text and carry on until it happened again. It was not
out of laziness but because I read that it could become a problem with the
language server when dealing with large files.

At some point, it started printing things like:

```markdown
Wriiiiiiii|
```

## Rewriting the config

A few weeks ago, I started doing what any `NeoVIM` developer would do when they
have some free time: I rewrote my configuration. Apart the fact I'm happy with
the more readable version (you can [have a
look](https://codeberg.org/maiste/dotfiles/src/branch/main/editor/.config/nvim)),
I realized it was time to get my hands dirty and dig into this lagging issue.

After some investigations, I came to understand the problem mostly occurred
editing large markdown files. The lag was also showing up on large files when
they were comments in it.

At some point, I saw this small popup at the bottom of my `NeoVIM` window:

![Notification of a check from ltex-ls](/static/images/blog/2025/ltex-ls.png)

It is a notification informing me the
[ltex-ls](https://github.com/valentjn/ltex-ls) had completed its job. It was
doing this on **every keystroke**.

My first test was to disable it, and... It worked! ü•≥ However, while disabling
it was a solution, the conscientious reader can easily understand this is not a
pleasant solution: I want my editor to yell at me when doing grammar mistakes.

## DuckDuckGo is my friend

I opened `Firefox` and started looking for a solution. The first interesting
point I found was [ltex-ls](https://github.com/valentjn/ltex-ls) had
not been maintained for two years! ü§¶üèª‚Äç‚ôÇÔ∏è Some people have forked the project and named
it [ltex-ls-plus](https://github.com/ltex-plus/ltex-ls-plus). The first step
was to replace it in my configuration:

```lua
local servers = {
    -- I have removed
    -- ltex = {
    -- [...]
    -- },
    -- and replaced it with;
    ltex_plus = {
        -- [...] We will see this part later.
    }
}
```

The "nice part" of being a late adopter is that the people at
[nvim-lspconfig](https://github.com/neovim/nvim-lspconfig) already added a
[configuration for
it](https://github.com/neovim/nvim-lspconfig/blob/master/lsp/ltex_plus.lua).

However, I want the server to be "slower" and only perform checks when I want
it to, specially when I save (`:w`) files. That's when I discovered two
interesting configuration: `debounce_text_changes` and `checkFrequency`. The
first one is a flag that asks `NeoVIM` to send the data only every `X` time
unit. The second allows the server to choose when to run. I changed the
settings to make it run only on save:

```lua
local servers = {
    ltex_plus = {
        settings = {
            ltex = {
                checkFrequency = "save", -- TADA!
                -- [...]
            }
        },
        flags = { debounce_text_changes = 300 }, -- TADA number 2! Here the time is in ms
    }
}
```

Thanks to this, I can now write in large files and check for grammar only when
I save. It reduces the load because it checks the file only once. Plus, as the
sending is delayed, it asks the server less frequently, also reducing the load
on the LSP[^2].

## Toward an improvement?

As I had to delve into the [ltext-plus-ls
documentation](https://ltex-plus.github.io/ltex-plus/advanced-usage.html#set-language-in-markdown-with-yaml-front-matter),
I discovered I could use the Front Matter[^1] to specify the language. Since my
[wiki](../../wiki/) mixes English and French, this is convenient.

Now I can specify the language with:

```markdown
---
lang: en-GB
---

Blabla bla bla blabla [...]
```

Thanks to a `sed` script, I have updated my website code to parse the new
format. Honestly, this is now a very neat experience!

## Conclusion

Sometimes, it is good to clean up the configuration as long as it doesn't take
more time than the time you will use software. It also shows how easy it is to
forget the dependencies of the tools we work with (contrary to the conscious
checks we do on the projects we work on).

Looking at my watch, it is herbal tea time for me ü´ñ I leave you with this.
Hope you enjoyed the article and that it might have helped you with your own
lagging issues.

[^1]: Front Matter refers to the data (in `YAML` or `JSON`) you have at the
    beginning of a file.
[^2]: Language Server Protocol
